---
layout: post
title:  "Adventures in PHP: Object Cloning"
date:   2016-06-10 16:00:00 -0400
tags: [books, pragmatic_programmer]
permalink: blog/2016/6-10/php-clone
comments: True
---

### Adventures in PHP: Object Cloning

Recently I have been experimenting with PHP. PHP is a very interesting language, to say the least. It feels a lot more like html to me than it does a traditional back end language like Ruby or Python. One of the problems that I ran into while working on some exercism exercises came while I was trying to manipulate some DateTime objects. While trying to create a new DateTime object, I did it the same way I typically would in Ruby. That is, I took the original DateTime variable (<i>$date</i>), and created a new variable with the same information (<i>$newdate</i>= <i>$date</i>). This caused a problem. Any changes I made to <i>$newdate</i> also happened to $date.

I found this to be very strange, because this would not happen in Ruby. In Ruby, assigning a new variable to an object creates a new object that is a copy of the original. So when you do (<i>newdate</i> = <i>date</i>), this creates a new object named "<i>newdate</i>," and gives that object the same information as "<i>date</i>". This allows you to manipulate <i>newdate</i> without affecting date. In PHP, however, this is not true for DateTime. Since DateTime is not a native data type, this instead takes the ORIGINAL object, and gives it a new name. Therefore, when you modify it, you are modifying the original object.

In order to get around this, you have to use <b>clone</b> (<i>$newdate</i> =  clone <i>$date</i>;). This takes the $date variable, and makes a new variable called <i>$newdate</i>. Now that <i>$newdate</i> is separate data, it can be modified without changing <i>$date</i> as well.  

Things like this are interesting quirks about programming languages that you will only discover by messing around with different languages. As my adventures into the world of programming continue, I look forward to discovering more of these things. It's what makes the world of programming so exciting. There is always something new that you can learn.
